how deep in debt can an advanced country
with a know with with with relatively
stable government go the fundamental
question of what is public debt what
does it mean for a government to be in
debt to its own people is a question
that both the left and the right are
dishonest about in this video you're
gonna see both Paul Krugman mainstream
left-wing economist and the very famous
milton friedman mainstream right-wing
economists being dishonest about this
issue in the same terms and i think
fundamentally for the same reasons
economics as a discipline is in small
part a science but is in very large part
about public relations about the
marketing of ideas it is in part about
applying common sense reasoning to
social problems but it is in a large
part about making your political
prejudices seem like common sense making
the objectives you want to achieve in
politics seem as inevitable and
inexorable and unanswerable as the hard
facts of the mainstream Sciences like
physics and chemistry and we all know
that is something that economics is not
Paul Krugman says think about the
history shown in the chart above Britain
did not emerge impoverished from the
Napoleonic Wars why why would he even be
saying this if it were if it were true
you must know you're being lied to look
at the chart look at the chart above see
where I have the red arrow I've added
the red arrow but the chart is true
saying Oh Britain did not emerge
impoverished from the Napoleonic Wars
the government ended up with a lot of
debt but the counterpart of this debt
was that the British property classes
owned a lot of consoles so consoles this
is a word here basically the same as a a
savings bond
so at least here he's being a little bit
more honest than in the quotation I gave
you last video last week on this topic
last time he just said oh debt doesn't
matter because as is the title of this
article debt is money we owe to
ourselves but here we just get a couple
of adjectives thrown in you the British
propertied classes were the ones who
owned the debt the British property
classes were the ones who were being
repaid not the poor not the
working-class not the middle class
so when you say debt is money that we
owe to ourselves what you actually mean
is it's money that the poor oh to the
rich isn't that what you mean you're
just being that little bit dishonest to
make it seem as if the movement of
resources here is morally neutral or is
of no significance whatsoever
now the libertarians and the
anarcho-capitalist and people on the
right wing side of the equation would
make a different point that also matters
also has some substance if the British
property classes own millions and
billions of dollars worth of these these
debt instruments they've put their money
into government debt that is by
definition money they are not using to
open a pancake restaurant to open a
factory to employ people to buy ships
and start shipping things to do all the
things the economy needs investors to do
that's money they're not using on their
own education and if they are really
very wealthy people it's also not money
that they're perhaps donating to
Cambridge and Oxford University that
provide education for others or build
facilities all of the things the British
property classes could have done with
that money are not happening precisely
because that money is being handed over
to the government and will be paid back
at a profit that profit coming from all
taxpayers the rich the poor and the
middle class alike so it is not
fair to say as he says here the title of
the article debt is money we owe to
ourselves no debt is money that the poor
and the middle class will pay to the
rich with the government as the main
intermediary
what we call a deficit is simply a form
of Taxation during this period of time
England did not build the Great Pyramids
they didn't build a great egg a latarian
society within England the exact same
way we can look at the loss of more than
one trillion dollars that the United
States spent conquering Afghanistan you
can look back at this period of time and
look at I don't know how much but an
unbelievable quantity of money that
England spent in the polyak wars and you
can get some sense of the lost
opportunity to spend that money on
something constructive on something that
would improve education or well-being
for the population general or hey
whatever you want to build the world's
biggest giant stone pyramids you want to
have one of the great wonders of the
world
something England is is still to this
day lacking it these are not the things
that British civilization did with its
wealth during this time if they were
going to go into this kind of
extraordinary debt and the argument he's
offering here which is just based on a
lie
quote Britain did not emerge
impoverished from the Napoleonic Wars do
you think that would be the perspective
of anyone who was alive at that time if
we go back now you can check the Hansard
you can check the recorded debates in
the British house of parliament from
that time you can read any history book
from that per term do you think if we go
back and read one book with one shred of
human sympathy for people were going
through do you think we're going to find
that just nobody in England was
concerned that the government had just
bankrupted itself fighting this war and
fighting a war that they wouldn't
perhaps directly profit from now let me
assess you question you know seeing as
this is supposedly a completely honest
neutral economists don't know there
weren't any really serious negative
consequences from England going at the
dead finish work hmm
can I think of any other Wars that
England started fighting right after
this one so they could try to recoup
this money what what was it that the
British Empire
right to do to make back the money to
fill in this this debt does anyone does
anyone remember that the British Empire
included places like Jamaica that it
included India that it included selling
opium grown in India to China does
anyone remember that they fought a
series of wars after this called
the opium wars and the express purpose
of those Wars was to try to get the
British Empire to break even or turn a
profit yes there were unbelievable
long-term consequences not just for the
politics of England not just for the
politics of Europe but for the politics
of the whole world including India and
China as the British Empire scrambled to
get itself out of debt
shame on you for lying paul krugman this
is a lie and lays both shallow and
profound to say that Britain did not
emerge impoverished from the diplomatic
wars and it would be a lie to say today
that the United States of America did
not emerge impoverished from the wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq how deep in debt
can an advanced country with a know with
with with relatively stable government
go a country like the United States
provided as the political will has
enormous ability to collect taxes and to
service debt if we want to we can we can
do you know huge things sorry right now
we have debt I think about 45% of GDP we
came out World War two with debt that
was a hundred and ten percent of GDP and
we worked that way down over the years
so that shows how far you can go now
maybe that was a little different
because was wartime but so my comparison
country my III look believe it or not at
Belgium which is God Dec which is I
think 87 percent of GDP and Belgium is
knows nothing particularly specialist
actually a little bit less stable then
then most of most Western advanced
countries no there's no run on Belgian
debt there they're able to do that
so that suggests that we could probably
in the United States add debt that was
like 40 percent of GDP if if if it
became necessary that's that's a lot of
running room it's not unlimited
we do this year after year after year it
couldn't start to become a problem but
but we do have substantial Running Room
I'm not actually just saying it doesn't
matter know Cheney asked the deficits
don't matter deficits do matter but we
have five six trillion dollars to play
with here I don't know about you but I
don't really feel like Paul Krugman is
being entirely truthful with me in that
clip I feel like he's being very evasive
and very abstracted in response to a
really simple direct question that he
should be able to answer honestly this
isn't outside of his strike zone right
so if he thinks the American government
can keep on spending hundreds of
billions of dollars per year increasing
the debt more hundreds of billions of
dollars of taxpayers money
going to enter his Pamela said that
there must be an upper limit to that he
must have some theory as to at what
point it becomes a problem when does it
become a crisis it can't be that he
believes in an infinite amount of debt
it must be finite right in the field of
economics we don't generally deal with
simple binary questions of right and
wrong good and bad we normally deal with
ideas that are true within a certain
numerical range or useful within a
certain American range but then become
meaningless become bizarre or become
ridiculous beyond a certain threshold
after a certain point so if his theory
was as he stated in this video from a
couple of years ago if he thought
America having 40% debt to GDP ratio so
having debt 40% of GDP you know that was
no problem
he should now be willing to admit that
there is a problem when the United
States of America is over 100 percent if
he thought it was no problem for the net
States of America to have a
level of indebtedness similar to Belgium
he should now be ringing alarm bells
when the United States of America has
followed his advice and has caught up
with Belgium isn't just as difficult
economic situation but that's not what
he says he's been profoundly dishonest
at every stage of this and if you just
compare the Articles he's written over a
period of 10-15 years get a sense of
that dishonesty take a look at these two
charts on screen
if anyone sincerely believed that the
United States of America has no problem
paying two hundred and sixty three
billion dollars per annum just in
interest payments on the national debt
if you think that's no problem then you
must be willing to admit it's a problem
if that increases to nine hundred and
fifteen billion now United States is a
big country maybe maybe one hundred
billion per annum would be no problem
okay it would be a huge accomplishment
if you could get it down to only a
hundred billion per year stead of two
hundred sixty one beer but even if it
were relatively small number like that
these are enormous numbers that would be
an amount of money that every year you
were asking poor people to pay you were
asking middle-class people to pay and
that fundamentally is a wealth transfer
going from everyone to the rich what we
call a deficit is simply a form of
Taxation if it's not financed by
printing money
it's a invisible tax on all property
because you own a piece of property but
you have to figure from the future
income of that property then more of it
will have to be taken from taxes in
order to finance this debt that is here
so it's it and those are bad taxes
they're not wholly bad taxes but they're
not good taxes and therefore I would
prefer not to finance by deficits on the
other hand when people talk about how
much damage interest payments are doing
to the country I want you to name me any
expenditure of government that does less
harm than interest payments
the interest payments don't use up any
resources there are no labor no labor
that's unavailable for something else
there's simply a transfer from taxpayers
to bondholders they do cost deadweight
cost of collecting the taxes and the
effect that has on incentives so there
isn't that cost but there's no resource
cost last week I talked to you about the
fact that Microsoft Corporation has over
100 billion u.s. dollars worth of
government debt at the time that that
article was pressed so they're profiting
from that if you run a small new
computer company you do computer
software and you're not in that position
how do you feel with that you say hey we
work real hard to manufacture computers
here or to make computer software we're
trying to compete with Microsoft but
whenever we're paying our taxes a
significant percentage of our taxes is
going to make the rich richer and it's
specifically going to Microsoft it's a
little bit strange no it's kind of
corrupting fundamental you know
principles of what the free market is
supposed to be whether you care about
them in principle or care about them in
practice or not let's go back to a
guarding light of center-left economics
paul krugman so as I said earlier he's
here questioning he stole he's here
trying to challenge your assumption that
debt is a problem because it's the
current generation spending money from
future generations that's not what
people mean when they speak about the
burden of debt on future generations
what they mean is that America as a
whole will be poorer just as a family
that runs up debt is poorer thereafter
does this make any sense well let's do a
thought experiment that doesn't at least
initially seem to have anything to do
with debt suppose that instead of
gifting seniors with debt president
Santorum passes a constitutional
amendment requiring that from now on
each American whose name begins with the
letters a through K will receive five
thousand dollars a year from the federal
government with the money to be raised
through extra taxes does this make
America as a whole poorer the obvious
answer is no not at least in any direct
sense
were just making a transfer from one
group to another were just making a
transfer from one group people whose
name the people whose names are L
through Z to the people whose names are
a through K he's being extremely
duplicitous here because the reality is
people who buy bonds people who buy
government savings bonds are rich this
is part of making the rich richer even
companies the small corner store the
small new computer start startup they
are not buying bonds Microsoft is buying
over 100 billion US dollars in bonds
right it's not a transfer that's
arbitrary that's benefiting half of the
population and not the other half okay
this is very specifically a type of
transfer of wealth that goes from the
poor to the rich it goes from the middle
class to the rich and yeah it goes from
some rich people to other rich people
but in a way that's fundamentally
irrational and unjust even if all the
people being taxed and benefiting from
this are wealthy which is of course
impossible but his excuses total income
hasn't changed now you could argue that
there are indirect costs because raising
taxes distorts incentives but that's a
very different story is it really is
that really so extraneous his example he
used before that oh you know nothing
really changes because the British
wealthy class they just buy up this
government debt changes things changes
the world it changes government policy
it created more Wars and the
consequences of that war did he indeed
bankrupt the British government and to
some extent burdened if did perhaps
didn't bankrupt the British ruling class
right and then that debt was repaid
through the conquest and exploitation of
India through selling opium to China
through fighting more Wars so that
England could be the dope dealer of
China through the sugar trade and the
rum trade out of Jamaica the
consequences were enormous
but invisibly yes the moneyed class of
england had their capital their
investment potential
their innovation potential taken away
from them because it was tied up in
government debt and the government
itself had a constraint on its ability
to spend money to start new initiatives
to do new things this really is part of
the bankrupting of a society you're just
lying about it it's just a straight-up
lie okay here's his conclusion his
inspiring conclusion okay you can see
what's coming a debt inherited from the
past is in effect simply a rule
requiring that one group of people the
people who didn't inherit bonds from
their parents make a transfer to another
group the people who did in plain
English that's called the rich get
richer
[Music]